The article begins with a history of precursors to Deep Blue, including ChipTest and Deep Thought. After Deep Thought beat a Grandmaster in tournament play in 1988, some of its development team went on to create Deep Thought 2, with twelve times as many chess engines (for a total of 24), better evaluation hardware and search software, and an extended Grandmaster play database. The first version of Deep Blue, in comparison, had 216 chess engines. After losing to Grandmaster Kasparov in February 1996, Deep Blue was revised to use new chips with enhanced features and speed. The second version of Deep Blue had 30 processors, each with 16 chess engines, 1 GB of RAM, and 4 GB of disk storage. One processor would search upper levels of the game tree and distribute lower branches to the rest of the nodes. This led to Deep Blue being able to search as many as 330 million positions each second.
Due to its massive search capacity (several orders of magnitude larger than other systems), Deep Blue ran a highly non-uniform search that rejected simple errors. Interestingly, this search has software and hardware components, with the evaluation function (among other functions) built into hardware.
Each chess engine consists of a move generator, evaluation function, and search control. The move generator generates all moves simultaneously, then selects one. The evaluation function analyzes moves to assign them values based on various chess measures. The search control runs hardware search.
Deep Blue had a set of about 4000 openings, hand-generated by a set of Grandmasters and chosen to emphasize Deep Blue’s strengths. While many of those chosen were specifically to arise against Kasparov, none did in the 1997 match. In addition to the openings, it also had a database of 700,000 Grandmaster games, where each position was assigned a bonus or penalty applied when it appeared in the search tree. These bonuses were generated based on number of appearances, strength of the move’s player, and results, among other criteria. With a high enough bonus, Deep Blue could even play a move without searching. Deep Blue also had endgame databases consisting of all positions with five or fewer pieces on the board (and some with six pieces).
