Turing begins by defining a game played between two people and a machine, where one of the people attempts to determine which of the other two is the machine using a series of questions. He proposes this game as an alternative to the more vaguely defined question "can machines think," wondering what will happen. Next, he explores the relevance of such a game. Since only the intellectual capabilities of the subjects can be tested, Turing argues that a machine constructed to imitate a person would perform well, if it could be constructed.
Continuing, Turing determines the subjects to be allowed as participants in the game. Since a biological creation would not likely be considered a "thinking machine," he rejects the use of biological techniques and restricts participation to digital computers. However, Turing also rejects the possibility of immediate experimentation. He writes that his goal is not to determine whether all computers can perform well in the game, but whether it would be possible to construct one that could.
Turing then describes the makeup of a digital computer. They consist of three parts: the store, the executive unit, and the control. The store is the bank of memory, and contains instructions for the computer to follow and other data that the computer is using. The executive unit carries out the instructions, and the control passes the instructions along to see that they are executed. Turing gives simple analogies of all of these systems and the computer as a whole. He also rejects the common idea that a digital computer must be electrical, citing Babbage’s Analytical Engine and acoustic storage as examples.
Again using simple analogies, Turing describes the concept of finite state machines. He then places a state machine and a digital computer programmed to mimic it in the imitation game described earlier. Since, with the proper program, a computer can mimic any state machine, he calls all digital computers equivalent. Finally, he revises his question from earlier, asking "is there a theoretical computer with sufficient storage, processing speed, and programming that it can satisfactorily play the imitation game against a person?"
